From the age of about five,
Mark Phillips was watched, tested, and ultimately recruited
to become part of The Company
which is known to the rest of us as the CIA.
He had astonishingly quick advances in the business world
all because, he says, he didn't ask questions.
In fact, he was so in the dark that he didn't even know
who his real employer was until he was
about 31 years of age.
This is about the time when a young woman
who he thought was a prostitute came to his attention
through a business colleague.
When he learned she was an MK-ULTRA mind control victim
he decided to risk it all to save Cathy O'Brien.
(ethereal music)
This story is one that
most likely our viewers have never heard anything
the likes of before.
It's very difficult to listen to aspects of it
and it is very, profoundly uplifting
to see what can happen in the presence of a genuine
and a loving presence.
With the desire and love and connections
and technology, etc. to bring a human being back
from the brink of not even knowing who they were in essence.
And this starts, both of you have your own beginning
but let's start with yours.
How your life took shape from a very young age.
I really believe it began at age six
when my mother fell off of a horse
that she and I were riding
and the horse stepped into her brain.
At that point in my life I just wanted to do something
for her, I wanted to get her help.
She survived the accident, it left her
severely mentally impaired.
She lost her ability to smell and taste.
She thought through her emotions rather than her logic.
She was extraordinarily difficult for most people
to deal with.
It was not a good, healthy situation for a child.
I had an abusive father who-
I was raised in a wealthy family and
my father was physically and psychologically abusive
and it left me with a speech impairment.
Which, at that point in time-
I was born May the 17th, 1943 so
this was in the mid forties when they really didn't know
why I couldn't talk.
All of a sudden, I was quite the talker up until
I was about six and rather than take me
to a psychologist or a psychiatrist to be analyzed
they just assumed that I didn't A, want to talk
or B, had some sort of mental impairment.
So, in essence, it was because I felt
I could no longer express myself.
Going through school and being unable to talk,
I could mutter a few words but beyond that-
I had a grandmother, my mother's mother that I could
speak with and she was about the only person
aside from going out into the forest and talking to trees.
I couldn't sing but I found out that I could sing words.
It gave me the impetus to want to become
not necessarily a brain surgeon
but someone who works with the mind.
And I had this at the forefront of my own mind.
Even at a young age.
Even from that young age.
I wanted to become a scientist.
I had opportunities in school to excel in certain areas
that would ensure that I could become a scientist
in these areas and I remember the disappointment
when I failed so miserably at chemistry
and I was such a horrible mathematician
and they discovered that I was dyslexic, severely dyslexic.
As a result, of course those dreams
of becoming a mind scientist were dashed.
Well, moving forward in my life,
I had the displeasure of becoming drafted
for the Vietnam War.
I moved, cleverly moved, my draft ward around the country
and the last place to call was Alabama.
I'm a native Tennessean.
And I moved my draft ward to Alabama
and had moved to Atlanta and had applied
for a number of jobs, I was going to school at night,
going to college at night and
was actually driving a forklift for the pipe company
to support myself and
my draft ward called me or sent me a letter,
told me to report to Montgomery, Alabama,
the Air Force base there, which I did.
And I thought, "Well this is the end of the world
"as I know it."
And I got a doctor to write an excuse
saying that I had all kinds of problems
from alcoholism to speech impairment to
all these things I didn't even drink.
My father was an alcoholic, I was scared of it.
Nevertheless he wrote all these things and I thought,
"Well this might save me."
So I turned that in and when they called my name-
By the way, my real name is Marquart
and when they call my name they call it as Margaret
and I got to hear about 7,000 young men
just scream in laughter.
Yeah, Margaret.
Yes.
So I stepped up and they called me up
and rather than send me through all the physical stuff
they sent me directly into a closed room area
that was in the back of this enormous hanger
that we were all bunked in together with.
And when I went in there, there were a number
of military brass sitting around a very large table
and there were also some men in suits there.
The guys in suits were very friendly towards me.
And this is what happened with most draftees?
I don't know, I really don't know.
I've heard different stories from different guys.
But I found out a lot of information there.
Right there on the spot.
They said, one of the military brass said,
"We understand that you do not want to fight
in this man's army because you're a coward."
Or something to that effect, it was I think a little more
I think there were a couple of cuss words used.
The guy was really angry looking at me.
He said, "We don't know why,
"these gentlemen here would like to talk with you
"about serving your country in another way."
And I'm thinking whoa.
What could I do?
So they call me over and they said,
they introduced themselves, they showed me
Department of Defense credentials
much like an FBI guy flashes his credentials.
They said DOD and then under it, it said DID,
Defense Intelligence Agency.
Believe it or not, I did not even know
what the intelligence community was.
I had heard of the CIA, I had never heard of anything else.
I'd heard of the KGB from newspaper articles.
Never about any sort of intelligence community.
Well at that point they said, "We have been
"monitoring you since-"
I think he said the fourth or fifth grade, grade school.
He said, "All children in public schools
"and most private schools, they are subjected to
"psychological testing and IQ testing
"at least three times before grade 12."
(coughs) Pardon me.
At that point in time he said,
"We believe you would be a great candidate
"for working within the intelligence community."
And I'm thinking, this guy thinks I'm that intelligent?
I was equating intelligence with the word intelligent.
Well he said, "We will call you.
He said, "You collect your things, get on the bus,
"go back to Atlanta," he said, "and you can expect
"a contact from us."
Well I went back to Atlanta and I got a phone call
within a few short days afterwards.
I had applied as a sales engineer for the Ampex Corporation.
Can you talk a little bit about Ampex?
Yeah.
Ampex was a military industrial provider, a huge one.
They basically invented magnetic tape or
not the theory, that was actually done in Nazi Germany
but they invented the whole idea of magnetic tape.
For recording.
For recording both video and audio.
They also invented at that time the instant replay.
Okay.
Which really put them on the map.
Well their industrial lines were selling larger,
selling to studios, recording studios, television studios,
and to military operations for instrumentation tape
and computer tape.
And you were to be a sales person?
That was my understanding.
I was gonna be a sales representative.
And then they upped the ante and said a sales engineer.
They said I was gonna have to go through engineering school
at Georgia Tech at night and my blood just turned ice cold
because I knew that required math.
And you were still dyslexic?
Yes, and at that point in time there were over
200 applicants and I stand to be corrected on that,
it might be double that number,
but there were over 200 applicants for that job
because with that job you got an automatic deferment
and that was another reason I'd applied for it.
It was published in the newspaper that way.
So when they call me up they said we'd like
you to come in for the second interview.
So I went in for the second interview and then that's when
they told me I needed to see the company psychologist
and psychiatrist and undergo some testing.
Well I was pressed for time.
It was embarrassing because I couldn't afford to lose my job
running the forklift and I didn't want to fail my courses
that I was taking at night in school.
So I was most uncomfortable with the whole ordeal
because I knew I was gonna fail.
When I went for the first interview,
the psychologist was an incredibly nice man.
He gave me a lot of tests and then he cued me in.
He said, "You'll be working for the intelligence community."
I said, "What is that?"
And he said, "It's like the CIA."
He said, "You'll be working for the Department of Defense
"and you need a top secret clearance.
"It will start out as a secret clearance of a certain level
"and then it will be elevated as time goes on
"and your exposure to various projects."
I said, "Well what am I gonna be doing?"
First thing in my mind was I guess they want me
to haul around radioactive material.
I mean I really had no self confidence
at that point in my life.
Well sure, you were very young.
I was very young and very frightened.
At that point, they brought me into,
they told me they said fine and this guy, he said,
"Now you're gonna be interviewed by a psychiatrist."
He said, "Never, ever lie."
He said, "Whatever you do," he said, "Don't ever
"lie about anything.
"Don't embellish anything.
"If you don't know the answer, tell him."
I said, "Well I'm gonna fail because
"my math skills are so horrible."
He said, "We know that."
I said, "Well (coughs) I'm supposed to go
"to engineering school."
He said, "You're only supposed to go there
"to learn terms."
He said, "You gotta fit in."
He said, "You don't have to be an engineer."
He said, "You're gonna be learning a lot of things."
He said, "What they want you to do is
"they want you to learn how to speak clearly.
"They want you to learn how to become the role,
"whatever's necessary and they want you to do this
"in secret while working for the Ampex Corporation."
And he said, "And your tenure at the Ampex Corporation
"may last a year, may last two years, it may last five,
"it may last six months and they may move you
"into another position with another company."
Well they did, many companies.
The point was, this testing went on for months
and months and months until finally one day,
out of sheer frustration I told them, I said,
"If I take one more day off from my job
"I'm gonna lose it."
And they said, "You mean you're not receiving
"any paychecks for this?"
I said, "No."
Because I still hadn't been hired.
And so they sent me a check for three months pay
at more money in that three months than I would've made
in two years working with the pipe thing.
So I retired as a pipe guy and decided that I could make it.
Even if they didn't hire me, I could find another job.
Right.
On what they paid me.
Well the fact of the matter was they hired me.
After they hired me, I had some incredible opportunities.
The first thing, and this is all D classified,
the first thing that they assigned me to was
the Emory University campus there in Atlanta, Georgia.
They were buying a lot of our product for research purposes
at the communicable disease center, the CDC,
which is right there on their campus.
They also had the Yerkes Primate Center right on that campus
and they also had, and I'll use the term
and it's not correct.
I don't know what the name of the project was there.
But it was basically what is known as the MK-ULTRA project
which is the government's now declassified term
for mind control research.
And this mind control research was for
behavioral modification on monkeys and apes
and this sort of thing.
Because the Russians had lost a spacecraft,
they had lost some astronauts,
and NASA was deathly afraid they were gonna have
the same thing.
So they thought well, we better have a backup plan.
So we're gonna teach these monkeys and apes how to
operate a rocket ship.
Just one question for clarification at this point.
When you were going through the battery
of psychological and psychiatric testing,
once it was all past, you can see patterns now
in terms of what were they looking for in you?
They were looking to see-
I mean, this is my impression.
Yes.
Only (coughs) excuse me, my throat.
They were looking to see if I had the integrity
to keep secrets.
They knew that I had spent so many years
living inside my own head and keeping secrets
and that I had learned by sheer observation
that by keeping secrets, people's feelings were saved
and embarrassing situations were avoided.
And so I had learned to keep secrets
kind of as a knee-jerk response to a problem
that I was quickly overcoming because I was being given
speech therapy, I was being given public communications-
But that pattern, that psychiatric pattern in you
had already been set?
Yes, indeed it had.
So secrets were part of your internal makeup
and they were looking to see how deep and reliable
this part of your makeup was.
So now you're, okay, I just wanted that clarification.
So now you, MK-ULTRA.
Well at this point I was able to watch monkeys
and higher apes to be trained to do various jobs.
Learn American Sign Language,
develop extraordinary communication skills,
things that I had never dreamed these apes
were capable of doing.
And I even developed friendships among
the people that worked there.
And my job was more of a bag man.
I was operating only as the fellow who took the film,
the file tapes, video tapes, and they went into a red bag
and they were sealed and I took them back
to Fort George Meade, Maryland where they were analyzed.
Where they went from there, I don't know.
That was my job.
I mean I just sat there and made sure
that the tape that came out of the cameras
went into that bag and there were no other copies made.
And there were other things that I did like
I went over phone records of people
that worked in these places.
I made sure that in some cases their cars were bugged,
and their houses were bugged, and these sort of things.
Although I didn't have to do the physical bugging,
I had to review the conversations that they were having
in their everyday lives to make sure they weren't
talking about what they were involved with.
Now, did this all seem pretty normal to you?
You were still a very young man.
Yes, but I also learned that, or at least felt like,
that this was a defense department issue
and that I was doing my job as a
"soldier working on American soil for the benefit
"of all Americans."
And I was convinced, totally convinced at that point in time
that some of the forecasts that I'd heard (coughs)
about behavioral modification being the wave of the future
that we could essentially empty out our prisons
and mental institutions because the next step
from working with primates is
I went into the mental institutions, both state and federal.
And I went into state and federal prisons
where people were, honest to God, volunteers.
There was no torture or anything like that done.
It was more in terms of drugs, using
experimental hypnosis, it was doing some
brain wave training, it was very mild electric shock.
I mean, much lighter than a nine volt battery,
you could barely feel it.
Stuff like that that would stimulate
various regions of the brain.
And I went from that sort of research on these people-
I mean, we're talking about incorrigible people who
could not even function in a padded cell
without hurting themselves.
So you were genuinely doing something that you felt
was going to make a difference to the world?
Yeah, indeed.
And then I had befriended so many of these scientists
and had learned so much that they actually started
allowing me to do parts of interviews
with some of the people.
Frankly, I was happy.
This was one of the best jobs that I ever had
and could imagine having in my whole life.
All while I'm thinking that I'm gonna learn something
I can help my mother with and make her
more independent and less dependent upon me
because I was having to support her and take care of her.
Her father was alive at that time but she was
really having to take care of him
and she couldn't even take care of herself.
Alcoholism?
No, her father.
She had divorced my father.
Gotchya, gotchya.
So when I moved away from the prisons-
And by the way I went from Ampex,
they moved me to the Codman Shurtleff division
of Johnson & Johnson.
The Codman Shurtleff division is the medical instruments
division for surgeries.
I am not one to want to look at blood product.
I am not one to want to watch surgery.
I have even difficulties watching my own finger
or hand being sewn up.
I don't like that sort of thing.
And I was subjected to brain surgeries.
That was the shortest lived job, assignment,
that I had because I fainted (laughs).
That'll take care of it (laughs).
A young man was brought in and he had been injured
in a football accident and I happened to be
in that particular hospital at the time
and the doctors that I happened to work with
who had clearance said, "We've got cameras in there,
"let's go in there and let's film this thing.
"We're gonna put a (mumbles)"
that's a drill bit in the kid's head, relieve the pressure,
and see what we can do.
In the meantime, we'll see how much brain damage is there
and we'll do a dia study real quick
and we'll get it all on video and you can ship it back
and it'll be something of a little bonus.
He said it'll look good for everybody.
Well I went in there, they put the (mumbles)
in his head and it was so much pressure in there
it exploded and his brains came out of his head.
Okay.
So that was all I could take.
I passed out and when I passed out,
being a 200-odd pound guy, six feet tall,
I made a big mess and fell over a whole lot of stuff.
I mean I wasn't one of these that crumpled,
I just went down.
So that wasn't your gig.
No.
So I got away from that very quickly.
I called my boss and I said, "Look,
"can't do it."
He said, "I already know."
He said, "What can you do?"
I said, "Well, I liked the job that I had."
And he said, "Well, that job is gone.
"And I think it's important you know why that job is gone."
Ampex Corporation was a California corporation.
At the time, the president and the
founder of it, Alexander M. Poniatoff, a Russian scientist,
but I can't recall the president's name.
They went up against a fellow by the name of Ronald Reagan,
who happened to be governor of California at that time.
Ronald Reagan was attempting to float a bill
that the state tax would pay for
that would in essence allow the state run prisons
to torture prisoners into a submissive state
to where they could control their minds.
And Ampex had the only, they had a lot of the equipment.
They, along with the General Medical Corporation
really were in a position to say yes or no.
In one sense, in another sense they had no say.
And the president of Ampex said no,
we're not involved with this
and lost a campaign against the governor.
Not knowing that Ronald Reagan was hand-picked
for the presidency later on, many years down the road.
Right.
You realize these people work 25 years in most cases
ahead of what the average individual knows.
And the stuff that I was seeing that was being done,
much of it still hasn't surfaced
as far as through, into the general public.
So that job is gone with Ampex.
Yeah, the job is gone with Ampex.
Ampex was completely destroyed overnight
as a military industrial supplier.
20 some-odd thousand people were let go.
I was the only one left in the office.
That's when I got transferred to Codman Shurtleff.
That job lasted, it took them longer to train me
to be able to communicate with these doctors
than the job lasted.
It took them I think four months to train me
and the job lasted three months.
So in a little over half a year I was done with that one.
And they said, "Well what would you like to do?"
I said, "I'm a pilot.
"How about something in the glamor business?"
Then they offered me a job with Revlon of all places.
And I thought, "No."
This is still part of the intelligence industry?
So they were putting you with Revlon?
The intelligence community is in every facet of industry.
But Revlon just is kind of throwing me a bit here.
I wouldn't have expected that.
That's an easy one for me to understand
but nevertheless I turned the job down because
I had done some male modeling
of Western clothes and things to supplement my income
way back before I ever got involved in this.
So that didn't appeal to me in the least
because of people being so phony.
But give me an idea.
Why would you have intelligence in Revlon?
I mean just, I'm naive.
It's an international corporation.
Okay so just by virtue of-
Yeah, it's like Coca-Cola was the first one in.
Coca-Cola probably has more CIA officers
involved in their overseas operations than
any other corporation in the world.
Okay.
McDonald's the same way and the list goes on.
Revlon is a huge one.
Okay.
The long and short of it was that they said,
"Well, you're a pilot."
I said, "Yes I am, I have my own airplane."
They said, "Well how about aviation?"
I said, "That's absolutely wonderful."
So they said we're gonna move you back
to your original home, Nashville, Tennessee.
I thought, "Why in the world would they move me there?"
So they said, "You just go back home, take a nice rest,
"wait'll you hear from us, and we'll send you a job offer."
They said, "You go out for an interview,
"act like you want the job,
"and take whatever they offer you."
And he said, "And the pay will be
"the same as you're getting."
I said, "Okay," I did.
I received a call from, at that time he was
a senior vice president for Capitol International Airways.
They were based in an old air force base.
Their home office was really at JFK.
That's where most of their aircraft were based out of.
However, they did all their service and maintenance
in Smyrna, Tennessee.
It's a little tiny town just outside of Nashville.
And there's a defunct air force base housed there.
Their operations where they fix their airplanes
and they were flying jumbo jets.
I went in and the guy looked me over and he said,
"What can you do?"
I said, "What do you want me to do?"
And I said, "I've worked as vice president in sales-"
I skipped over-
"Vice president in charge of sales and marketing
"for a medical group, laser systems and electronics."
I said, "I was a regional director,
"sales and marketing director for Codman Shurtleff,
"short-lived."
And I said, "And I worked for the Ampex Corporation."
And he said, "We know all this."
He said, "What can you do for us?"
I said, "I don't really know, I don't know
"what you have to offer.
"Whatever it is, I will do my best."
I said, "What do you do?"
And he told me, I said, "I'd like to do what you do.
"I want your job."
You said that?
Yeah.
(interviewer laughs)
He did the same thing.
He laughed at me.
I bet.
He said, "Well you can sure have it
"because I don't want it."
Whoa.
I said, "That's a good thing."
Nevertheless they hired me.
That was my, the first time, we had 26 offices worldwide
and that was the first time that I ever heard
those letters, CIA-
Of course the company's name was CIA.
Right.
And it was the largest supplemental in the world
at that time and Jimmy Carter deregulated
the supplemental airlines.
They collapsed.
And it collapsed and was sold to the Saudis.
I remember that, mm-hmm.
I moved to another carrier in Alaska
run by the acting president of Capitol.
And they brought me up there and I found out
that I was working in another CIA operation.
And I kept hearing, you know, you work for CIA,
you work for the CIA.
And when I got to Alaska, someone told me,
that I trusted very much, he said,
"You know we are all working for CIA."
I said, "Capitol has nothing to do-"
He said, "Capitol?"
He said, "You really don't know, do you?"
How old were you by this time?
I'm ashamed to tell you, I'm very ashamed to tell you.
I was about 31 years old.
And you still didn't know?
No, ma'am, I did not.
Amazing.
It's that compartmentalized.
Yes.
And the fact that I didn't ask questions
was the reason that I rose to the top.
Right.
And that was how I was an executive
for most all of my working career, life.
Well, when I found out,
I decided that I didn't want any part of it
and then I found out what they were doing
to the Native Indians, Eskimos up there and importing-
You know during the Indians, when the United States
were taking over the American Native Indians,
they gave them those blankets that were infected with
small pox.
Well, they did something very similar in Alaska.
They introduced drugs and alcohol to
Native Alaskans who are highly allergic to it
and it killed them.
And then they told them they couldn't whale hunt anymore,
they moved in Greenpeace and a few other organizations
that would limit their ability to eat
and they couldn't hunt whales anymore.
So we sent them chicken.
Chicken rots in their stomach and they develop
some kind of horrific disease or problem and they die.
So we were killing them with alcohol, chicken, and cocaine.
And when I found this out,
I found it out quite by accident.
I was looking for some records in my boss's cabinet
and I ran across them, some highly classified paperwork.
And when I questioned him about it,
he looked at me and he said,
"Our company, our world, our lives runs on oil."
He said, "That's what they're sitting on."
I said, "Well, why can't we just pay them for it
"with money that doesn't really mean anything anyway?
"Why do we have to kill them?"
And he said, "That's not for you or me to determine."
And that's when I said, "I can't take it anymore."
I didn't tell him on the spot, I was too much of a coward.
I just packed up and disappeared and left him a note.
Well, you don't do that.
I wound up with something that,
I wound up wandering around in an avocado grove
in South Florida, naked and with a brain fever.
It was horrible.
I talked with a friend of mine who was still active
in the intelligence community.
He put me in touch with a local doctor.
That local doctor found a Pulitzer Prize,
later Pulitzer Prize winner at Vanderbilt University
in Nashville and here I go back to Nashville again.
And they gave me a series of Interferon shots
and they were quite expensive at that time,
they may still be, I don't know.
He told me they were $60,000 I think was the figure
and I took three of them and it cured me.
He said, "But don't ever donate blood
"to anybody."
Well, he said, "Your bloodstream looks like a garbage can."
I said, "Well, am I gonna die from this?"
He says, "No," he said, "But I don't know what it was,
"still don't know what it was and this didn't happen,
"you were never here," he said, "and please, whatever you do
"don't ever, ever, ever do what you did again.
"Whatever it was and I don't want to know."
You didn't know either.
I couldn't do it again because you can't quite but once.
Right.
And so I quite and I opened up a small antique business
and I was successful.
My name stayed in the papers because I was also
doing some work for the government under
Donna Tuttle, who was Under Secretary of Travel and Tourism
and I was doing marketing campaigns for
the Southeastern part of the United States,
working with various tour attraction places
and companies that provided attractions.
So you retained some of your contacts?
Oh yeah I mean.
Right, and so you were doing fine
in the business community as long as you
kept your nose clean and didn't make waves.
Yeah, I didn't make any noise, nothing.
Right.
I was fine.
And then in 1987 I was approached by
a childhood friend that I'd long since gotten away from.
Matter of fact, I hadn't even seen him since high school.
He said he knew a fellow that had been seeing my name
in the paper and all my success stories with Capitol
and some of the other things I was involved with.
He said, "He's got an idea that you might be interested in.
"He's a country music entertainer."
And I was thinking, I don't like country music for one thing
and I'm thinking oh God, you know, this sounds like
smacks of something I used to have to do
when I'd fake till you make it type thing.
I thought oh Lord, I can't fake liking country music.
And I don't know anything about it anyway.
(interviewer laughs)
But nevertheless I met with this guy and
I found him to be corrupt to say the least.
I found him to be dishonest, potentially,
and most likely a sociopath because I could see that he
believed in his own stuff.
But his idea was wonderful.
He wanted to set up a joint venture deal
with People's Republic of China to manufacture
these giant capacitor banks for their mining industry
because they were having to shut it down and
since they'd opened up to the West,
they weren't ready for the energy crisis
that they were enduring so they had to do something
and that was one of the first efforts to show
that here, we're doing something to conserve energy.
So they were gonna use these giant capacitors to help
stop the power factor lows.
These mines and the glass companies and the
steel manufacturing companies were creating
every time they started up or shut down.
I succeeded and I had a Hong Kong business partner
over there who was an arms dealer, a huge arms dealer.
Own shipping lines.
Matter of fact, one of his ships was blown up
while I was with him in Thailand by the Americans.
They were supposedly delivering missiles to Libya.
This guy was a, I know this sounds incredible,
I really liked him.
I had a lot of respect for him.
He was a great businessman, he was a basically very nice guy
I just didn't like what he did for a living.
He was extraordinarily successful.
But on the flip side of the coin, I had worked with some
probably the worst people on the planet
and I liked many of them because I overlooked
everything in their lives I didn't want to know,
I overlooked everything in their lives just to see
what they were doing from a scientific standpoint
that would better life on this planet for mankind.
I've never been a fan of the drug companies
and I could see that what they were gonna do
was gonna really put a dent in
the drug companies' pocketbook.
This is going back to the days of the medical stuff.
So I was seeing that what he was doing
would help the environment, would help the Chinese,
would help everybody.
I'm not taking into mind and consideration
that the Chinese people weren't being paid much.
It wasn't gonna help their way of living,
it was gonna pollute their land, you know.
I wasn't looking far enough, I was only looking right there,
just like I always have.
Kind of simple and altruistic motivation
in certain senses throughout from one gig to the next.
Very compartmentalized mentality.
And I maintained that compartmentalized mentality
until we actually opened up our plant,
our first plant in the Shenzhen Province
which is in Southern China.
It's the industrial zone.
And at the ribbon cutting ceremony when
the mayor was there and the,
actually the Under Secretary for the Chinese
Department of Defense was there.
I mean this was a humongous shindig with probably,
probably a thousand people there in attendance.
Big banquet, I mean it was an enormous thing.
And the government was actually footing the bill
for the banquet (laughs).
That wasn't coming out of my pocket.
And I was really pleased with it, with the whole thing
and that was at that point when I was brought over,
I was standing there with my interpreter and we were talking
with some dignitaries, I don't recall who they were.
One of them was an engineer I liked very much
and another one was an engineer from somewhere else
and they were gonna be working either with us
or for us, I wasn't sure.
And then all of a sudden, my interpreter,
my Hong Kong business partner who had
become my close friend,
everybody kind of moved away
and this fellow in a suit approached me,
he had a little briefcase,
and he approached me and he said,
in pretty good English he said,
"I'd like to have a word with you, Mr. Phillips.
"I'd like to speak with you privately,"
I think is what he said exactly.
And I told him, "Sure."
And I'm looking around and seeing, everybody is just
walking away from me, oh man, this is a setup.
This is bad.
And I had no clue what was gonna come down.
And we just take a few steps away
and he opens up his briefcase and pulls out this folder
and the first thing he starts showing me is a picture
of Alex Houston having sex with a young boy.
Anybody could make pictures, okay.
Anybody can make pictures.
Explain who Alex Houston is again for us.
Alex Houston was my business partner.
Okay, because you hadn't mentioned his name before.
I was president of the corporation.
Alex Houston was vice president.
It was his idea, he was the entertainer from Nashville
and he was the one that initiated this whole thing.
But I had all the state department contacts
and I'm the one who set it up.
So now this man showed you this picture.
He showed me the picture and I wasn't impressed.
I said, "Pictures are pictures, you know."
He said, "You don't think this is bad?"
He said, "This is punishable by death in China.
"Your business partner cannot come here."
And then he flipped the next page and I saw some things
looked like bank account transactions
in the Cayman Islands and Switzerland and other countries,
he was flipping through them.
And then he got to where the money shot was.
He showed me my classified files.
The files on me that they'd been maintaining since 1952.
The interviews that were done by the Department of Defense
when I finally got my first clearance
and they were interviewing my neighbors from, as a child,
and my schoolteachers.
And all the stuff was in there and they look like originals.
Not copies.
Because originals have got little colored stamps on them.
Everybody that reads it has to sign off.
All these files were highly classified.
And then he began to show me other things
about Alex Houston.
And then he went into detail, he said,
"Mr. Houston is involved in child and adult prostitution.
"He is involved in child and adult pornography.
"He is involved in illicit or street drugs,"
or however he termed it.
Importation into the United States and other places.
And he said, "Mr. Houston works for the CIA
"and Mr. Houston has contacts-"
Oh he said, "And this goes all the way to the White House."
He said, "We don't need an international incident.
"We just want a clean joint venture company.
"You are welcome to remain as president.
"You must buy Mr. Houston out and get him
"out of this business."
Well my first thought was they wanted my stock
because at this point, waiting this late,
the tab was gonna go skyrocketing up
for what I was gonna have to buy Houston out for
and I just simply wasn't gonna take every dime I had
in the bank, which at that time was a little over
$2 million, and donate it to buying Alex Houston
out of business that I didn't even know
was it going to succeed or not.
I thought oh Lord, they've set me up for sure.
And they said, "Oh and by the way,
"whatever amount of money it takes, we'll foot it
"and we'll have our lawyers meet with you
"and we'll provide you lawyers in Tennessee
"and we'll bring Houston in, get him signed out
"of the company, give him his payoff for the company."
I said, "Well, you know, actually," I said,
"I can get Mr. Houston out pretty cheap."
I said, "In our by-laws it says if either one of us
"is stealing from the company it's grounds for
"immediate termination and the value of the stock held
"was gonna be a set value."
Which in this case was $25,000.
So I had caught Alex Houston stealing.
I told you, he would do anything, nothing.
And it was little stuff but he was stealing.
So it wasn't hard to get that, yeah.
No, but when I caught him stealing little stuff
and then I listened in on some of his conversations
with some of our distributors and how he was
handling the billing.
Just weasel, a grand here, a grand there, I'm thinking,
"This guy is a sleaze-bag."
But this was before I knew this stuff from the Chinese.
Right.
Well the Chinese told me, they said,
"He has a woman, young woman and a child
"in his charge."
And I'm thinking the only woman I've seen was one time
this (laughs) bimbo picked him up at the airport
that looked like a prostitute and
she acted like she didn't have a brain in her head
and she was very, very trashily dressed.
I was not impressed.
Beautiful girl but, my God,
I didn't want anybody to see me there close to him.
She remembers to this day that I literally ran
in front of both of them because I didn't want-
I knew everybody in the city and I certainly didn't want
anybody seeing me with her.
So when I got back, I got them out and
I failed to mention one thing.
He said the words "mind control."
He said this young woman and this child in his charge,
their minds had been manipulated and/or they were
under his control.
Well I knew he was a stage hypnotist
and I knew a little bit about hypnosis
and I knew a little bit about drugs
and when he said CIA, mind control, drugs,
and all this stuff and I'm thinking all these years I worked
for the betterment of mankind and here
somebody's using it for prostituting a woman
who's been tortured apparently out of her mind
and a little bitty child?
You know, this is what they're doing with the research
that we did in earnest to clean out our mental institutions
and our prisons?
And now we've got more people in prison than ever before
in history?
And our mental institutions overflowed so much that
Reagan turned everybody out
just so they'd die on the streets?
I'm thinking my God, you know, I gotta do something.
So, I contacted some of the psychiatrists
that I'd worked with and they said no,
we can't do anything.
I said, "That's impossible."
And he said, "Our families would be dead in five minutes."
If you tried to intervene on behalf-
He said, "You can't do this."
I said, "Well I'm not in the company anymore."
I said, "I can do anything I want to."
They said, "You can't."
I said, "Yes I can."
So then I inquired as to how I could get them out.
The woman and child?
Yeah, I was told who her owner was
and I was told it's Senator Robert C. Byrd
from West Virginia was their owner.
By the way, Robert Byrd was put into office, let's see,
five years before Cathy O'Brien, the young woman,
was even born.
He's still in office.
And, by the way, the Ku Klux Klan put him in office
as a matter of public record.
Right.
Well, when I found out how to get them out
I waited until Alex Houston had gone to Boys Town
to entertain himself.
And once I found out about Boys Town and him being there,
I used that opportunity to trigger Cathy O'Brien out.
I had to let the phone ring a number of times.
Hang up, call back, ring a number of times,
hang up, call back, then she would answer.
And I told her exactly where to meet Mark Phillips,
I didn't say me.
How did you know to do that?
I knew people who worked in, around,
I mean Cathy O'Brien is not an isolated case
by any stretch of the imagination
and these people are not real creative.
They use the same themes, same programming
over and over again.
So they told me what to ask her
and tell her I was the voice of God.
And I had to go into her house where-
She was, one of her covers was she used
the Christian religion as a cover.
(laughs) It was such a contradiction.
Looked like the cheapest prostitute you ever saw
and you know, and this stupid grin on her face all the time
and always talking about Jesus this, Jesus that.
And it was my job to go in and break the spine on her bible
to Psalms 31:31 I think or something, I'm not sure.
That's what you were instructed to do?
Yeah.
Because it says when you first open it,
you know the ribbon and I highlighted it,
it says, the first three words or four words,
"Mark, the perfect man." (laughs)
Okay.
I mean this is how the CIA works.
Yeah, I mean in some ways it almost sounds
kind of drama filled and sophomoric but
this is serious business, serious business.
Very serious.
So I met her and I got them out and
without frightening them too much.
I nevertheless let them know they were in safe hands now,
that they were not to have any contact with Alex Houston
or anyone else at that time, that I was
going to take care of them and-
Actually all I was doing was I wanted to get them
out of there before Alex Houston got back.
And believe it or not, the right hand never knew
what the left hand was doing because Alex Houston called me
and he asked me, "Have you seen or heard from Cathy?"
And I said, "Why?"
And he said, famous line, he said, "She's done left.
"And stole even my VCR."
I mean I'm going oh my God, this guy's worried
about a VCR.
Well I had no clue of anything.
She didn't take anything really.
I had told her to sit down and remember what-
He had a huge antique safe and I said,
"I want you to sit down in front of that safe
"and remember each number that he dialed it to
"and I want you to do the same thing
"because I want you to open that safe
"and take everything out of there."
Because I thought, I wasn't looking for money,
what I was looking for were records.
And she did it and I got the records
and I took them to friends with US Customs
and it went all the way to William von Raab
who, by the way, resigned his position publicly
when he said, "I can no longer fight my own government
"in this so-called war on drugs."
And I had other friends inside of Customs
that were very helpful.
US Customs Enforcement, for one.
I didn't have any friends inside the FBI.
We never had a lot of respect for them
for a lot of reasons.
So now Cathy is out, she's out of there,
she and her daughter are out of there or are they in there?
(laughs) I don't know what to do with them.
Yeah, so you have them,
you literally have them in your possession.
I'm searching the planet to get help
for this woman and her child.
Your plan only extended as far as getting her out.
You didn't know what you were going to do-
I didn't want anything to do with them,
I didn't even like them.
All I wanted to do was get them out of there
and get them some help.
That's it, the end.
And I couldn't.
And it's like getting on the back of a tiger,
I didn't know what to do.
And then, I think one of the things that made the decision
for me that I had no backdoors, no way to run,
nowhere to hide was when all of a sudden
everything that I had worked for and saved
and paid taxes on my entire life,
which was a little $2.2 million plus that I had in the bank
evaporated.
And when I hired a lawyer to find out where it was
they said the FBI had it under investigation
and it was outside their jurisdiction because it had moved
into a national security issue.
Okay.
And I'm going, "What does my money
"have to do with a national security issue?"
And then all of a sudden I find out I've got death threats
being placed against me.
Well, when the CIA threatens your life,
you don't have anything to worry about, ever.
It's when they don't say a word that you're in trouble.
It's when they don't harrass you or don't do anything.
You're a dead guy walking because
that's the shot you never hear.
All I heard were threats and all these idle things
and so I had searched the world over,
literally, trying to get them help and couldn't.
And I took them to Alaska where I had friends
and where everybody was photographed going in and going out.
There's only two ways in, well three.
We went there and I pulled all the information together
from Alex Houston's safe and presented it to Customs,
presented it to other members of federal law enforcement,
they investigated it, found out it was true.
Said hey, this is a shadow government thing.
He said, "You know about this."
I said, "Yes, I do."
And this was in relationship to Cathy and her daughter?
Yes.
Okay.
In the meantime, the CIA, or I think
members of the CIA-
I was given access to some doctors and they
literally walked me through a process
by which Cathy O'Brien recovered.
And during her recovery, it took nine months
and at the end of nine months, she never changed again.
She's just been a person, her core personality came together
and her daughter, unfortunately her abuse was different.
Even though it was less of it,
her daughter's abuse was different and unfortunately
her daughter did not respond to a psychological approach.
And now, I mean?
Her daughter is in desperate need of recovery.
Her daughter lives on welfare.
Her daughter lives in a nearby state.
She still could die of respiratory arrest
by being around her mother for extended periods of time.
There's any number of problems that come up
because of that programming that has never been broken.
But thank God at least you were able to
find the proper help for Cathy
whose story is unbelievable.
We're hearing parallel stories here.
We've heard your story about what brought you
to this junction in your life where you were to meet her
and I thank you very much for that.
And then we're going to continue this story
by talking to Cathy now.
Thank you very much for this opportunity.
Thank you very much.
From here you'll want to watch the full interview
with Cathy O'Brien, now Mark's wife.
This is a very challenging journey
but one that brings a powerful message
of survival and hope.
To read the full story of Cathy's experience
and rescue, click on the link below.
Be aware that this is very graphic material.
(ethereal music)